As the CIs note, the current statistical methods used to investigate the genetic architecture of complex traits are somehow simplistic as they assume no interaction between genotypes and covariates. A recent paper (Robinson et al 2017), reported that age-genotype and smoking-genotype interaction explained an important proportion of the total variability of BMI. As noted by the CIs, the approach employed in Robinson et al, is limited in that the covariates need to be categorized. The CIs propose a method based on reaction norm models to circumvent this limitation. This method aims to improve our understanding of the achitecture of complex traits, improve prediction based on genotypes and reduce potential confounding (pleiotropy) when applied in Mendelian Randomization studies by disentangling cause from consequence.

Although I believe that the outcome of this project will lead to important advances in the area, I have a few comments:

1. It is of great interest those approaches that only require GWAS summary statistics (such as LD-score regression) to investigate the genetic architecture of complex traits. CIs mention that they will develop a version of the methods that will make use of only GWAS summary statistics. However, it appears that for it to work the raw data needs to first be analysed with their proposed methods (reaction norm models) and therefore won't be possible to apply it to the thousands of already available GWAS summary results.

2. It is proposed that the method can be used to remove the pleiotropic effects of genetics variants by disentangling cause from consequence and therefore can lead to improvements in Mendelian Randomization, which core assumption is that instrumental variables (genetic variants) are only associated to the outcome through their effects on a exposure. I don't see, however that the approach will enable the use of all genetic variants as instruments as the CIs propose. As far as I understand, the method can only adjust for measured confounders, and therefore is virtually impossible to be sure that there is not other unmeasured confounder biasing the estimates.     

3. Maybe the part of the project that I found of most interest is the application of the approach to covariates such as gene expression and DNA methylation. It would indeed be exciting to see how the effect of genetic variants on height, bmi, or even gene expression change with respect to DNA methylation. However, I wonder whether a whole genome approach is necessary in the light that most of the effect of genetic variants on DNA methylation / gene expression are in cis. Is it expected to see widespread interaction between genetic variants and DNA methylation in other place in the genome? It was not clear to me if the approach can fit the thousands DNA methylation covariates in the model. Also, it appears to me that for this to work, sample size should be considerable and therefore multiple cohorts should be combined leading (potentially) to study specific biases. 


Feasibility

It is clear to me that the research team has the techinical skills and theoretical background to carry out the proposed project to completion. Most of the datasets that they will imploy are publicly are already available to them and there are many others in the public domain that they could get access to. In term of facilities, they have access to the necessary high performance computer clusters. Moreover, the team have important collaborations internationally and across Australia with researchers expert in statistical genetics that will further facilitate the delivery of the project and application to a wider set of datasets. I have no doubt the this project, if funded, will be completed in the proposed time-frame. 

Benefit

Research on complex tratis genetics has increased considerably in the last decade. The umprecedented amount of genetic and phenotypic data that we now have through initiatives such as UK Biobank, is leading to ground breaking discoveries on the genetic basis of complex traits. We have began to see some translation of these discoveries in terms of phenotypic prediction based in genetic data, and assesment of causality between a trait and disease through Mendellian Randomization. The benefit of the proposed project will of course depend on how this method improves phenotypic prediction and whether it could facilitate the utilization of Mendelian Randomization in the presence of pleiotropy. As I note in the comments above, it is not clear to me that it will enable the utilization of genetic variants with lower effect on the exposure, as I can't see how pleiotropy on unmeasured confoudners will be removed. In terms of phenotypic prediction, Robinson et al 2017, showed that at least for BMI, genotype-covariate interaction explains an important proportion of variability and therefore the proposed project may lead to improvements in prediction on hundreds of other traits. I would like to see however, if the CIs are aware of other instances of genotype-covariate interaction, particularly in animal studies. I think listing them would be important to further assess the potential benefits of the proposed projects. Also it would be of great benefit if they could comment on whether the approach can somehow be adapted to be applied to the already available GWAS summary statistics, without needing to re-run the analyses on raw data. Finally, I indeed see that will be of great benefit to the community the implementation of the approach in an user friendly and efficient software.
